
KNOWN LIMITS
Collected here so they can be found in one place rather than
only in the help for the option each one belongs to.

INPUT MUST BE UTF-8
A byte-order mark is stripped if present. Anything else is
refused rather than guessed at, since guessing would mean
returning a wrong answer quietly:
  cp1252 / latin-1, which Excel's plain "Save as CSV" writes on
  a Western locale, fails naming the record and the line it is
  in, the field, and how far into that field the first bad byte
  lies. Read the byte the message gives with care: it is where
  the record starts, not where the bad byte is. Seek to it and
  count on by the index the message ends with, through however
  many fields precede the named one -- or simply convert the
  file, which is the answer either way. UTF-16 is named
  explicitly, with or without a byte-order mark.
Convert first if needed:

|    iconv -f CP1252 -t UTF-8 in.csv > out.csv
|    iconv -f UTF-16 -t UTF-8 in.csv > out.csv

A field whose data genuinely holds NUL bytes is passed through
untouched. Only UTF-16's alternating NUL pattern is refused, not
any NUL at all.

THE INPUT FILE CANNOT ALSO BE THE OUTPUT
There is no in-place mode, and a redirection is not one. A shell
opens the redirection before csvdt is started, so 'csvdt in.csv
> in.csv' hands over a file already emptied: the data is gone
before csvdt has seen a byte of it, and nothing here can get it
back. Both that and the appending form are refused by identity
rather than by name -- device and inode on Linux and macOS,
volume serial and file index on Windows -- so a symbolic link or
another route to the same file is caught with them. Write
another file and move it into place:

|    csvdt -u1 in.csv > out.csv && mv out.csv in.csv

COLUMNS ARE ADDRESSED BY POSITION
Always by number from 0, never by header name, so a repeated
header name is not ambiguous. A column number refers to the
input, and does not shift as --remove or -a/--arrange change the
row.

-l/--local DEPENDS ON MORE THAN THE INPUT
It is the only conversion here that does. -u, -o, -d, -s and -r
work from the offset the record already carries, so the same
input gives the same output on any machine, from any build, for
ever. -l answers a different question -- what did the clock read
in some zone -- and that takes two things the record never
carried:
  The zone, from TZ or, unset, the host's own configuration. The
  same input and the same binary therefore give different
  results on differently configured hosts. The rules, from the
  IANA data compiled into this binary rather than the machine's.
  That keeps a result independent of the host's data, but a
  build only knows the rules that existed when it was
  made. --version reports the release; a rebuild picks up newer
  ones.
Note also that -l replaces the offset the record carried rather
than deriving from it. Where a result has to be reproducible
from the file alone, convert with -u or -o, and keep -l for
reading.

-l OUTPUT IS NOT SORTABLE AS TEXT
Following the rules means the offset varies from row to row,
which is the point of it and also its cost: a column holding
both +01:00 and +02:00 no longer sorts into the order the events
happened. Where an autumn shift repeats an hour, two different
instants read the same on the clock and differ only in offset,
and sorting puts the later one first.

-u and -o give one offset throughout, so their output sorts
chronologically by construction. Build a timeline with those,
and use -i/--insert to keep an -l column beside it for reading.
A TZ naming a zone this binary does not know is refused, rather
than quietly answered in UTC. The deprecated single-word
names -- EET, WET, CET, MET, EST5EDT -- are links in the release
bundled here, each to a geographic zone, and carry the whole of
that zone's history.

EET answers exactly as Europe/Athens does, WET as Europe/Lisbon,
CET and MET as Europe/Brussels, EST5EDT as America/New_York, on
every day from 1850 to now. They did not always. IANA once
defined them as zones holding a rule and no history at all, and
then they answered for dates before those rules began as though
they had always applied -- EET reading +03:00 through a 1950
summer where Athens read +02:00.

--version says which release is built in; a build older than the
change behaves the older way, which is reason enough to name the
geographic zone in work that has to be reproduced. It is also
the clearer thing to write down. IANA treats its pre-1970 rules
as best effort, so -l on timestamps that old is approximate by
design rather than by fault.

-l WRITES parse_err WHERE THE ZONE'S OFFSET IS NOT WHOLE MINUTES
RFC3339 writes an offset as +HH:MM, with nowhere to put a
seconds part. Before a place adopted standard time its offset
was the local mean time of its longitude, which is rarely a
whole minute: Europe/Amsterdam +00:17:30, America/New_York
-04:56:02.

Africa/Monrovia kept -00:44:30 until January 1972, so this is
not only ancient history. Such a result is marked rather than
written, because writing it would name a different instant from
the input: the offset rounds to the nearest minute while the
clock time keeps its seconds, so 1971-06-01T12:00:00Z became
1971-06-01T11:15:30-00:45, which reads back as 12:00:30Z.

The timestamp is still in its own column beside the marker. -u
and -o are unaffected -- theirs are whole-minute offsets by
construction -- and so is -s/--split, which reads the offset the
record already carried. A TZ naming a zone behaves the same on
every platform. A TZ holding POSIX rules instead of a name, such
as EST5EDT,M3.2.0,M11.1.0, is honoured only on Unix; on Windows
the system's zone is used.

-o/--offset ACCEPTS ONLY REAL OFFSETS
-12:00 through +14:00. A typo beyond that range is refused
rather than converted, so it cannot quietly produce a timestamp
carrying an offset no place has ever used.

AN UNCLOSED QUOTE IS NOT REPORTED AS ONE
There is no error for a quote that is opened and never closed.
Everything after it is read as one field -- newlines, delimiters
and all the rows that follow -- to the end of the file. What
that shows up as is a record with too few fields, which is also
what a genuinely ragged file gives, and it is the only sign
there is:

|    a,b     -> CSV error: found record with 1 fields,
|    "x,2       but the previous record has 2 fields
|    3,4

This matters because of what the obvious next step does.
--flexible is the answer to raggedness, so reaching for it here
accepts the mangled record instead: those three lines come out
as one field holding "x,2\n3,4, valid CSV that no longer
resembles the input, and exit 0. A field genuinely holding
newlines is a real thing, which is why this cannot simply be
refused -- the two are indistinguishable once parsed. Check the
file, rather than the option, when a count is off by a lot. One
aggravation under --comment: closing a trailing comment takes a
final newline, which is supplied when the input lacks one, and
an input that instead ends inside an unclosed quote takes that
newline into the field as data. The mangled parse can therefore
differ with and without --comment. Both readings are wrong the
same way -- the file is the problem, not the flag.

A CR-ONLY FILE LOSES ROWS TO --comment
Classic Mac line endings -- \r alone, never \n -- end a data
record, but only \n ends a comment. In a file whose lines all
end in \r, the first comment line therefore runs on through
every row that follows, and the run drops them all without a
word: a file that begins with a comment comes out empty, exit 0.
The same bytes without --comment parse row by row.

A lone \r-ended comment line inside an ordinary file loses the
rows up to the next \n the same way. Convert the line endings
first -- \r\n and \n are both fine.

THE OUTPUT IS CANONICAL CSV, NOT A COPY OF THE INPUT
Records are parsed and written again rather than passed through,
so a run that changes nothing about the data still normalises
how it is written:
  CRLF line endings are read and written as LF. A Windows file
  therefore differs from its original on every line. A final
  newline is added if the input lacked one. Quotes are written
  only where they are needed, so "a","b" comes back as a,b --
  and with --single-quote, single-quoted input is rewritten with
  double quotes, since only reading uses the single one. That
  output is therefore read back WITHOUT --single-quote; read
  with it again, a field the writer quoted keeps its double
  quotes as data and splits on any delimiter inside it. A run
  whose output holds such a field says so on stderr, with a
  count.
A field's own text is not among them: it is passed through as
the file wrote it, whitespace included, unless --trim is asked
for. Converting does not need the trimming, since a timestamp is
read past any whitespace around it. None of this alters a
value's meaning as CSV, but it does mean the output is not
byte-comparable with the input, so keep the original where the
file itself is the evidence.

With --comment in use, the writer is told the comment character,
and a field holding it is quoted exactly as a field holding the
delimiter is: quoting is what keeps it data rather than the
start of a comment, so the output reads back with the same
--comment, rows and all. This adds quotes the input may not have
carried -- under --comment '#' the field a#b comes back as
"a#b" -- which changes nothing about what the value is, only how
it is written, like every other normalisation here.

Two quoting styles cannot give that protection, and there the
rows a second read would drop are counted and reported on stderr
at the end of the run, the same way parse_err is. 'never' quotes
nothing, by definition. 'nonnumeric' decides by whether the
field is a number and consults nothing else, so --comment '-'
over the numeric field -5 writes it bare.

The header counts there too, and is the worst of them: a second
read drops the header rather than a row, so -H takes the first
data row for the column names, and that row is then exempt from
the conversion rather than missing from it. Every column number
still lines up, which is what makes it quiet. It is counted with
the rest and said separately.

This is about the output alone. A quoted field in the input is
data whatever it starts with, and always was: a comment is only
recognised where one begins a line.

A delimiter can go the same way. 'nonnumeric' will not quote a
number whatever it holds, so a --print-delimiter a number can
hold is written bare inside one: under --print-delimiter '.' the
field 5.5 goes out unquoted, and a second read finds two fields
where one was written, every column number after it in that row
shifting with them. Those rows are counted and reported on
stderr as well.

Which characters those are follows the float syntax rather than
being a list worth memorising: any digit, '.', '-', '+', 'e' or
'E', and the letters of inf, infinity and nan -- a, f, i, n, t
and y -- since those parse as numbers as well. Either case, so
'Y' splits INFINITY where 'y' splits infinity. Twenty-seven
characters in all, and every delimiter outside them is safe
under this style, the default ',' among them.

'never' can do it to any field rather than only a number, but
that is the style whose whole description is that it writes
invalid CSV where the data needs quoting, so it is said in
advance rather than counted afterwards.

A VALUE THAT WILL NOT PARSE IS MARKED, NOT FATAL
Every conversion writes the literal parse_err in place of a
result it could not produce and carries on with the next row, so
one malformed line in a large log does not throw away the run.
How many did not convert is reported on stderr at the end:

|    csvdt: 3 of 40122 values could not be converted,
|    and were written as parse_err

That is stderr rather than the output, so it disturbs nothing a
pipe is reading, and the run still exits 0: a few failures among
many rows are ordinary. Nothing converting at all is not, and
does not exit 0 -- the column given is probably not the one
holding the timestamps, or they are not in a format csvdt reads.
The output is written either way; only the status distinguishes
it from a run that worked. Where a policy is stricter than that
-- any failure at all is a failure -- count the markers:

|    csvdt -H -p -u1 log.csv | grep -c parse_err

This is why the marker is a fixed word rather than an empty
field: an empty field is invisible, and indistinguishable from a
value the source really left blank. The value that would not
parse normally stays beside the marker in its own column, so
what failed can still be read. The one exception is -i replace,
which puts the marker where the value was -- keep the original
file.

-d/--duration WITH ONE COLUMN TRUSTS THE ROW ORDER
It measures each row against the row before it, in file order.
Sort the file first, or the result is the gap between
neighbouring rows rather than between neighbouring instants.
Against the row before it that parsed, strictly: an unreadable
line is marked and skipped over, so the next measurement spans
it. And the first row's PT0S is the absence of anything to
measure against, not a measured zero.

A LEAP SECOND ADDS NOTHING TO A SPAN
-d/--duration counts ordinary seconds, so the extra second a
leap second inserts is not among them. 2016-12-31T23:59:60Z and
the 2017-01-01T00:00:00Z a moment after it measure PT0S apart,
and a span reaching across that month end is one second short of
true UTC for every leap second it covers. This is how nearly
every system keeps time -- Unix time has no room for the extra
second either -- so the answer agrees with what other tools
report for the same two timestamps: it is elapsed civil time
rather than elapsed SI seconds.

There have been 27 of them and none since 2016, so only a span
reaching back past then is affected at all, by at most 27
seconds. A :60 that is not at a month end is refused rather than
counted; see TIMESTAMP FORMATS.

--flexible's FILLING MODES ARE THE ONLY OPTIONS THAT ADD DATA
Everything else here converts, moves or drops what was already
there. See --flexible's own help for what that means for
evidence.

ROWS ARE PROCESSED ONE AT A TIME
Memory use grows with the widest single record, not with the
file: a million ordinary rows stream through flat, but each
record is held whole while it is worked on, so one enormous
field costs about twice its own size in memory. It is held
twice over -- once in the buffer it was read into, and once as
the field parsed out of it -- and both stay until the record is
done with. The case that matters is not exotic: it is the
unclosed quote above, which turns everything after it, possibly
the rest of the file, into one field.

A crafted or damaged input can cost twice its full size in
memory that way, where the same bytes as ordinary rows cost
almost nothing. Measured, a 64 MB field peaks at about 134 MB
against the 10 MB an empty run takes, and the same figure comes
back whatever the run was asked to do: the two copies are the
reader's, not any action's.
It costs time as well, and in proportion: doubling the field
costs about twice as long and no worse, whatever the field
holds. Measured, a 128 MB field is read and written in about
half a second; the writer's worst case, a field of nothing but
quote characters where every one doubles again on the way out,
takes about two seconds for the same size. So it is memory,
above, that a damaged file spends -- not time.

An ordinary file of a few hundred megabytes is the other way
about. Memory stays flat, about 10 MB whatever the size, and
time is the only thing that grows with it: measured, 256 MB of
rows takes some three seconds to reformat and four to convert a
column. Both figures are one machine's and yours will differ;
the proportion is the part that holds anywhere.

The one thing streaming rules out is knowing about the whole
file before writing, which is why --flexible=fix pads only to
the first record's width. --flexible=widest gets around it by
reading the input twice rather than by holding it, copying a
pipe to a temporary file when it has to.

LINUX IS THE INTENDED PLATFORM
macOS and Windows are supported on a best-effort basis. All
three are built and tested on every commit, and a report about
any of them is worth making, but Linux is what csvdt is
developed and packaged on, and what the differential checks are
run against before a release. The other two get less attention
and less coverage.

Where a behaviour cannot be had on one of them, this help says
so rather than leaving it to be found out. The refusal of a
redirection onto the input holds on Linux, macOS and Windows
alike, by whatever a file's identity is called there.
