Numbers the columns and shows the top of the file, then exits
without converting anything. For finding the column number an
action wants, which every one of them takes and which nothing
in the file states.

|    $ csvdt -H -p --peek sales.csv
|    0                     1     2
|    when                  who   level
|    2026-01-01T00:00:00Z  ada   info

'-H' and '-p' mean here what they mean everywhere else, so the
rows shown are the rows a run would work on. Without '-H' the
first record of the file is data and is shown as data: two
rows, the numbering and it. With '-H' the reader takes that
record as a header rather than data, so what is shown is the
first data row -- the file's second line. Add '-p', which is
what asks for a header to be written, and the header is shown
above it: the three-row form above.

Claiming '-H' over a file that has no header therefore shows
the second line, for the same reason a run would convert from
there. The option says a header is present and is believed.

The columns are padded so each number sits above its own field.
That padding is not CSV and is not meant to be: this writes a
table to read, not data to pass on, which is why it is a mode
of its own rather than something added to a run. Nothing else
is written, so nothing downstream has to know about it.

Padded by character count, so a field of wide or combining
characters lines up by count rather than by how wide a terminal
draws it. A tab, carriage return or newline inside a field is
shown as '\t', '\r' or '\n' rather than breaking the table into
more rows than it has.

Reads the file the way a run would: '--read-delimiter',
'--comment', '--single-quote' and '--trim' all apply, so the
columns are the ones a run would see. Uneven records are shown
rather than refused, whatever '--flexible' would have done:
somebody looking for a column number is often looking because
the file is ragged, and the numbering covers the widest of the
rows shown.

The options that write are refused with it -- an action,
'--round-seconds', '--remove', '-a/--arrange', '-i/--insert',
'--flexible', '--fill-log', '--quote' and '--print-delimiter' --
since this writes no CSV for them to act on. Everything not in
that list applies: the four above that decide what a record is,
and '-H' and '-p'.

An input holding no records has nothing to number: that is said
on stderr, and the run still ends 0, since an empty file is not
an error here any more than anywhere else.
